docs(changelog): 0.22.0 release notes (#1998)
MotiaDev/motia: docs/changelog/index.mdx

type: "reference"
---

<Update label="0.22.0" description="July 2026">
  ## Recoverable triggers survive startup races and provider restarts

>   `RegisterTrigger` no longer fails when its trigger type isn't registered yet. The engine parks the registration intent in `pending_triggers`, logs `[PENDING]`, and acks success; when the trigger type registers — or a provider re-registers after a restart — matching intents drain and activate. A provider disconnect moves its live bindings back to pending (`[DISABLED]`) and they recover on re-register. Consumers that connect before providers, and provider restarts that used to drop other workers' bindings, are now both safe. A bind that reaches the engine while the type *is* registered but whose activation fails because the provider connection is closing is now parked and replayed on the next type registration too, instead of being silently dropped until the binding worker restarts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`RegisterTrigger` no longer fails when its trigger type isn't registered yet. Consumers that connect before providers, and provider restarts that used to drop other workers' bindings, are now both safe. 
  
The engine optimistically stores the registration intent in `pending_triggers`, logs `[PENDING]`, and acks success; when the trigger type registers — or a provider re-registers after a restart — the triggers are registered appropriately to the worker.
  
A provider disconnect moves its live bindings back to pending (`[DISABLED]`) and they recover on re-register. A bind that reaches the engine while the type *is* registered but whose activation fails because the provider connection is closing is now stored optimistically and replayed on the next type registration too.
```

Reviewer 2: Applied — split into three paragraphs with the 'optimistically stores' wording. (commit 226415f)

  ## `TriggerAction.Enqueue` routes through the standalone queue worker

  Enqueue actions are delivered to the registered `engine::queue::enqueue` provider instead of the in-process queue module. Engine-owned receipt IDs are preserved and `traceparent` / `baggage` propagate to queued work; a missing or failing provider fails closed with `enqueue_error` — there is no silent in-process fallback. `durable:subscriber` and `TriggerAction.Enqueue` now require the standalone `queue` worker. The legacy in-engine `iii-queue` builtin was retired from the default config but remains available **opt-in**: an explicit `iii-queue` entry in `config.yaml` still boots it (`enabled_by_default = false`).

>   ## Per-subscriber queue retry tuning is honored

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ## Per-subscriber queue retry tuning is corrected
```

Reviewer 2: Applied — heading now 'is corrected'. (226415f)

  ## `engine::observability` is now a required engine worker

  Observability is always injected — like `configuration` — with defaults living in `ObservabilityWorkerConfig::default()`. `iii worker add` no longer writes an observability `config:` block into `config.yaml`, and first boot always gets a valid configuration seeded to `./config/iii-observability.yaml`. `${VAR:default}` placeholders (including `__III_ENGINE_VERSION__`) are expanded when publishing the live OTEL config.

  ## `engine::functions::list` filters by multiple workers

  The call gains a `workers: [...]` filter alongside the existing single `worker: String` field, listing functions owned by any of several workers in one request. When both are set they OR-combine.

  ## Registry tags in worker manifests

>   `iii.worker.yaml` accepts optional `tags` publish metadata — a list of strings surfaced in the generated schema for registry discovery — with clear validation errors on malformed entries. It does not change worker runtime behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `iii.worker.yaml` now accepts optional `tags` metadata: a list of strings surfaced in the generated schema for registry discovery. It does not change worker runtime behavior.
```

Reviewer 2: Applied. (226415f)

  - Accepted worker WebSocket sockets that never complete the upgrade are no longer held open by the idle timeout.
  - The Node SDK bounds WebSocket connect attempts and detects half-open sockets.
  - Spawned builtin daemons receive the engine's actual WebSocket address.
  - Registry binary workers now inherit the engine's `III_ENGINE_URL` / `III_URL` when the `iii-worker-manager` runs on a non-default port, so they connect instead of assuming the default port; `iii-worker start`/`restart` resolve the manager port from `config.yaml` when `--port` is omitted.

  ## Managed worker names propagate to the SDKs via `III_WORKER_NAME`

  `iii-worker` injects the `config.yaml` entry name as `III_WORKER_NAME` into every managed start path (libkrun, OCI, binary), and the Node, Python, and Rust SDKs default their reported worker name from it. A worker whose code sets no name now matches its config entry instead of self-reporting `hostname:pid` and timing out on `iii worker add --wait`. An explicit `workerName` / `worker_name` still wins; the manifest `env:` block cannot override the injected value.

  ## `iii worker` CLI audit

>   A full pass over the CLI surface (every operation except `add`) fixed: `remove` now deletes the `iii.lock` entry so removed workers stay removed; `status` terminates on `EngineDown` instead of hanging forever and returns non-zero exit codes so it works as a scriptable readiness probe; `clear` (all) also wipes `~/.iii/managed`; `update` takes the same project lock as `sync` and prints a friendly message when `iii.lock` is missing; `logs` drops the dead `--address`/`--port` flags and returns consistent exit codes; `sandbox create`/`run` fail fast when the engine is down instead of pulling a full image first. `iii worker list` / `status` also reflect engine truth rather than local config. A hostless `iii worker add` run from a non-project directory (no config file, no exported `III_CONFIG_PATH`) now installs through the running local engine instead of writing a stray config no engine watches and hanging for 120s.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  A full pass over the CLI surface (every operation except `add`) fixed: `remove` now deletes the `iii.lock` entry so removed workers stay removed; `status` terminates on `EngineDown` instead of hanging forever and returns non-zero exit codes so it works as a scriptable readiness probe; `clear` (all) also wipes `~/.iii/managed`; `update` takes the same project lock as `sync` and prints a friendly message when `iii.lock` is missing; `logs` drops the dead `--address`/`--port` flags and returns consistent exit codes; `sandbox create`/`run` fail fast when the engine is down instead of pulling a full image first. `iii worker list` / `status` also reflect engine truth rather than local config. A hostless `iii worker add` run from a non-project directory (no config file, no exported `III_CONFIG_PATH`) now installs through the running local engine instead.
```

Reviewer 2: Applied — trimmed the trailing clause. (226415f)

  ## Breaking: `RegisterFunction::new_async_with_bad_request` removed (Rust SDK)

  The `new_async_with_bad_request` constructor is removed from the Rust SDK — source-breaking for external consumers that constructed it directly. Wire behavior is unchanged: malformed `worker::*` payloads still return the W105 `BadRequest` envelope with a `worker::schema` hint, a policy that now lives entirely in the worker daemon rather than the SDK.

  ## Additional fixes

  - Node and browser SDKs default trigger generics so untyped `trigger` calls compile under `tsc`.
  - The browser SDK exports `IIIReconnectionConfig` and `RegisterFunctionFormat`, and generates invocation UUIDs in insecure (non-HTTPS) contexts.
  - The engine rejects duplicate migrated builtin workers and warns on deprecated builtin names.
  - The Docker image boots cleanly: `/app/config` is pre-created for the non-root user, and the config seed-strip no longer logs spurious warnings on a read-only mount.

>   - Managed builtin workers drop the `iii-` prefix (except `iii-directory`); references use the shorter `http`, `state`, `queue`, `cron`, and `pubsub` names.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Some workers drop the `iii-` prefix:`http`, `state`, `queue`, `cron`, and `pubsub` names.
```

Reviewer 2: Applied. (226415f)

type: "reference"
---

<Update label="0.22.0" description="July 2026">
  ## Recoverable triggers survive startup races and provider restarts

  `RegisterTrigger` no longer fails when its trigger type isn't registered yet. Consumers that connect before providers, and provider restarts that used to drop other workers' bindings, are now both safe.

  The engine optimistically stores the registration intent in `pending_triggers`, logs `[PENDING]`, and acks success; when the trigger type registers — or a provider re-registers after a restart — the triggers are registered appropriately to the worker.

  A provider disconnect moves its live bindings back to pending (`[DISABLED]`) and they recover on re-register. A bind that reaches the engine while the type *is* registered but whose activation fails because the provider connection is closing is now stored optimistically and replayed on the next type registration too.

  ## `TriggerAction.Enqueue` routes through the standalone queue worker

>   Enqueue actions are delivered to the registered `engine::queue::enqueue` provider instead of the in-process queue module. Engine-owned receipt IDs are preserved and `traceparent` / `baggage` propagate to queued work; a missing or failing provider fails closed with `enqueue_error` — there is no silent in-process fallback. `durable:subscriber` and `TriggerAction.Enqueue` now require the standalone `queue` worker. The legacy in-engine `iii-queue` builtin was retired from the default config but remains available **opt-in**: an explicit `iii-queue` entry in `config.yaml` still boots it (`enabled_by_default = false`).

Reviewer 2: Good catch — applied 'queue worker'. (9a72462)
